README.md, before:

# B (باء) Programming Language

B (باء) is a programming language designed to support Arabic syntax while maintaining full compatibility with K&R C features. It allows developers to write code using Arabic keywords and identifiers while following established C programming patterns.

## Current Status (v0.1.10.0)

The project now supports:

### Core Features

- **Preprocessor Directives:**
  - `#تضمين <...>` and `#تضمين "..."` (Include files)
  - `#تعريف NAME ...` (Parameterless and function-like macro definition/substitution, **including rescanning of expansion results**).
  - `#الغاء_تعريف NAME` (Undefine macro)
  - Conditional compilation (`#إذا_عرف`, `#إذا_لم_يعرف`, `#إذا`, `#وإلا_إذا`, `#إلا`, `#نهاية_إذا`) (using `معرف` for `defined`)
  - Stringification (`#`) and Token Pasting (`##`) operators in macros.
  - Predefined Arabic macros: `__الملف__` (FILE), `__السطر__` (LINE - expands to integer), `__التاريخ__` (DATE), `__الوقت__` (TIME). (Planned: `__الدالة__` for `__func__`, `__إصدار_المعيار_باء__` for Baa version).
  - Variadic Macros (using `وسائط_إضافية` for `...`, and `__وسائط_متغيرة__` for `__VA_ARGS__`). - *[Implemented]*
  - Additional Predefined Macros: `__الدالة__` (expands to placeholder `L"__BAA_FUNCTION_PLACEHOLDER__"`), `__إصدار_المعيار_باء__` (expands to `10010L`). - *[Implemented]*
  - Other Standard Directives (Planned: `#خطأ`, `#تحذير`, `#سطر`, `#براغما`, and `أمر_براغما` operator).

- **Basic Type System (نظام الأنواع الأساسي):** (K&R C compatibility with Arabic keywords)
  - `عدد_صحيح` (int) - 32-bit integer
  - `عدد_حقيقي` (float) - 32-bit float
  - `حرف` (char) - 16-bit UTF-16 character
  - `منطقي` (boolean) - Logical true/false values (`صحيح`, `خطأ`)
  - `فراغ` (void) - No value type
  - (Planned: `عدد_صحيح_طويل_جدا` for long long int)

- **Core Operator System (نظام المعاملات الأساسي):**
  - Arithmetic operators (+, -, *, /, %)
  - Comparison operators (==, !=, <, >, <=, >=)
  - Assignment operator (=)
  - Compound assignment operators (+=, -=, *=, /=, %=)
  - Increment/decrement operators (`++`, `--`)
  - Logical operators (`&&`, `||`, `!`)
  - Type checking and validation
  - Arabic operator names

- **Control Flow Structures (بنى التحكم في التدفق):**
  - `إذا`/`وإلا` (if/else)
  - `طالما` (while)
  - `لكل` (for - uses C-style semicolons internally)
  - `إرجع` (return)
  - `توقف` (break)
  - `أكمل` (continue)
  - `اختر`/`حالة`/`افتراضي` (switch/case/default)
  - (Planned: `افعل` for do-while, `تعداد` for enum)

- **Function System (نظام الدوال):** (Uses C-style declarations: `return_type name(params)`)
  - Regular function parameters
  - Optional parameters (with default values)
  - Rest parameters (variable argument lists)
  - Named arguments support
  - Method vs. function distinction

- Literals
  - **Numeric Literals:**
    - Integers: Decimal (Western `0-9` & Arabic-Indic `٠-٩`), Binary (`0b`/`0B`), Hexadecimal (`0x`/`0X`). (Planned: Arabic suffixes like `غ` for unsigned, `ط` for long, `طط` for long long).
    - Floats: Using `.` or Arabic `٫` as decimal separator. Scientific notation (using `أ` as exponent marker). (Planned: Arabic suffix `ح` for float).
    - Underscores (`_`) supported as separators in all number types.
    - Examples: `123`, `١٢٣غ`, `0b1010طط`, `0xFACEط`, `1_000_000`, `3.14ح`, `٣٫١٤`, `1.5أ-2`.
  - **String Literals:** `"..."` (Planned: Arabic escapes like `\س`, `\م` using `\` as escape char).
  - **Character Literals:** `'...'` (Planned: Arabic escapes like `\س`, `\م` using `\` as escape char).
  - **Boolean Literals:** `صحيح` (true), `خطأ` (false).
  - (Planned: `تعداد` keyword for enumerations).
  - (Planned: Struct/union member access using `::` for direct and `->` for pointer).

- Arabic File Support
  - Native `.ب` extension
  - UTF-16LE encoding support
  - Arabic file naming
  - Build system integration

For detailed information about Arabic support, see [Arabic Support Documentation](docs/arabic_support.md).

### Project Status Overview

#### What's Working

- **Preprocessor**: Handles includes (`#تضمين`), object-like and function-like macros (`#تعريف` with parameters, including variadic macros using `وسائط_إضافية`/`__وسائط_متغيرة__`, `#`, `##`, and **rescanning**), undefines (`#الغاء_تعريف`), conditional compilation (including expression evaluation for `#إذا`/`#وإلا_إذا`), predefined Arabic macros (`__الملف__`, `__السطر__` (as integer), `__التاريخ__`, `__الوقت__`). Error reporting is unified and provides original source locations (file, line, column).
- **Core Architecture**: Well-defined architecture with clear separation of concerns
- **Type System**: Basic types including Boolean, type conversion rules, and type checking
- **AST (Abstract Syntax Tree)**: Comprehensive node structure, program, function nodes, enhanced parameter handling
- **Lexer**: UTF-16LE file processing (from preprocessor output). Modularized structure. Robust token recognition for keywords, identifiers (Arabic/English), types, boolean literals, all operators. Advanced numeric literal scanning (Arabic-Indic digits, binary/hex prefixes, underscores, Arabic decimal separator `٫`, scientific notation). String and character literal scanning with standard and Unicode escapes. Accurate line/column tracking and error reporting.
- **Parser**: Recursive descent implementation, expression parsing with precedence, statement parsing
- **Utils**: Memory management, string handling, error infrastructure
- **Preprocessor integration with include and basic macro support.**
- **Additional Predefined Macros**: `__الدالة__` (as placeholder) and `__إصدار_المعيار_باء__` are implemented in the preprocessor.

#### What's Not Working

- **Code Generation**: LLVM integration is incomplete, mostly placeholder code
- **Parser Integration**: Individual components exist but full integration is incomplete
- **Standard Library**: Defined but not implemented
- **Testing Infrastructure**: Framework defined but implementation is limited

#### What Needs Improvement

- **Arabic Support**: RTL text handling, more comprehensive error messages
- **Error Handling**: More detailed messages, better recovery mechanisms
- **Documentation**: Generally updated and consolidated. Specific component details may need further review.
- **Build System**: Cross-platform support, dependency management

#### What Needs Fixing

- **Lexer Issues**: UTF-16LE handling, Arabic character recognition
- **Parser Issues**: Expression precedence, statement termination, control flow parsing
- **Memory Management**: Potential leaks, inconsistent allocation
- **Integration Issues**: Component integration, compilation pipeline gaps

### Changelog

**Added:**

- Boolean type (منطقي) with literals صحيح (true) and خطأ (false)
- Compound assignment operators (+=, -=, *=, /=, %=)
- Increment/decrement operators (++, --)
- Enhanced function parameter handling (optional, rest, named arguments)
- Method vs. function distinction in AST
- Enhanced parser debug output for better troubleshooting
- Test files for Arabic program parsing
- UTF-8 support for Arabic identifiers in the parser
- LLVM code generation infrastructure (placeholder)
- Improved error handling system (including unified preprocessor error reporting)

**Changed:**

- Refactored parser functions for improved error handling
- Simplified number parsing (temporarily removed decimal support)
- Improved error messages with more context
- Updated project structure to match architecture documentation
- Focus on Parser Enhancements, Code Generation, Lexer Enhancements, and AST Improvements.
- *See [docs/roadmap.md](docs/roadmap.md) for the high-level plan and component-specific roadmaps (e.g., `docs/LEXER_ROADMAP.md`, `docs/PREPROCESSOR_ROADMAP.md`) for details.*

**Fixed:**

- Memory leaks in parser error handling
- Function declaration parsing
- Identifier parsing for UTF-16LE characters
- File handling for UTF-16LE encoded files

### Roadmap

**Completed Features:**

- Core components (AST, Type System, Operators, Memory Management, Error Handling)
- Advanced operators (compound assignment, increment/decrement)
- Boolean type support
- Enhanced function parameter system
- Arabic support (UTF-16LE encoding, Arabic identifiers, Basic RTL support, Arabic error messages)
- Documentation (Language specification, Arabic support guide, C comparison, Architecture overview, Component documentation)

**In Progress:**

- Parser Development (Grammar definition, Token handling, Error recovery, Source location tracking)
- Code Generation (LLVM integration planning, Basic code emission, Debug information support)
- Standard Library (Basic I/O functions, String manipulation, Memory management, File operations)

**Short-term Goals (0.2.0):**

- Focus on Parser Enhancements, Code Generation, Lexer Enhancements, and AST Improvements.
- *See [docs/roadmap.md](docs/roadmap.md) for the high-level plan and component-specific roadmaps (e.g., `docs/LEXER_ROADMAP.md`) for details.*

### Project Structure

```
baa/
├── include/
│   └── baa/           # Public header files
│       ├── ast/       # AST definitions
│       ├── lexer/     # Lexer interface
│       ├── parser/    # Parser interface
│       ├── preprocessor/ # Preprocessor interface
│       ├── types/     # Type system interface
│       ├── utils/     # Utility functions
│       └── codegen/   # Code generation interface
├── src/
│   ├── ast/          # AST implementation
│   ├── lexer/        # Lexer implementation
│   ├── parser/       # Parser implementation
│   ├── preprocessor/ # Preprocessor implementation
│   ├── types/        # Type system implementation
│   ├── operators/    # Operator system implementation
│   ├── codegen/      # Code generation (incomplete)
│   ├── utils/        # Utility functions
│   ├── control_flow/ # Control flow implementation
│   ├── compiler.c    # Main compilation logic
│   └── main.c        # Executable entry point
├── tests/
│   ├── unit/         # Unit tests (limited)
│   └── integration/  # Integration tests (placeholder)
└── docs/             # Documentation
    ├── preprocessor.md     # Preprocessor documentation
    ├── PREPROCESSOR_ROADMAP.md # Detailed Preprocessor roadmap
    ├── architecture.md     # System architecture overview & component status
    ├── language.md         # Language specification
    ├── project_structure.md # Detailed directory layout (Arabic)
    ├── roadmap.md          # High-level development roadmap
    ├── lexer.md            # Lexer structure & usage
    ├── LEXER_ROADMAP.md    # Detailed Lexer roadmap
    ├── AST_STRUCTURE.md    # AST structure details
    ├── AST_ROADMAP.md      # Detailed AST roadmap
    ├── PARSER_STRUCTURE.md # Parser structure details
    ├── PARSER_ROADMAP.md   # Detailed Parser roadmap
    ├── arabic_support.md   # Arabic support details
    ├── c_comparison.md     # Comparison with C
    ├── development.md      # Developer guide
    └── ...                 # Other specific docs
```

## Building from Source

### Prerequisites

- CMake 3.20 or higher
- K&R C compliant compiler
- Git for version control
- LLVM development libraries (optional, for code generation)
- Unicode support libraries

### Build Steps

```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd baa
mkdir build && cd build
cmake ..
cmake --build .
```

### Running Tests

```bash
cd build
ctest --output-on-failure
```

### Preprocessor Tester

A standalone tool is available to test the preprocessor in isolation:

```bash
# After building the project:
./build/bin/baa_preprocessor_tester <path/to/your/file.baa>
```

Note: The preprocessor currently expects input files to be encoded in UTF-16LE with a BOM.

## Features

### Type Safety

- Strong type checking
- Explicit conversion rules
- Error type for invalid operations
- UTF-16 support for Arabic text

### Operator System

- Type-safe operations
- Arabic operator names
- K&R C operator precedence
- Comprehensive error handling

### Documentation

- Detailed Arabic error messages
- Comprehensive documentation in both English and Arabic
- Examples and usage guides
- Development guidelines

## File Extensions

The Baa programming language supports two file extensions:

- `.ب` - The primary Arabic file extension
- `.baa` - Alternative Latin file extension

### Example Program

```baa
#تضمين <مكتبة_طباعة> // Assuming a Baa standard library header
#تعريف EXIT_SUCCESS 0

// مثال برنامج بسيط بلغة باء
// Baa uses C-style function declarations
عدد_صحيح رئيسية() {
    اطبع("مرحباً بالعالم!").
    إرجع EXIT_SUCCESS.
}
```

## Known Issues and Limitations

- Code generation is not fully implemented yet
- Complex language constructs may not parse correctly
- Error messages may not be fully localized
- Limited testing coverage
- UTF-16LE handling has edge cases with certain characters
- Parser error recovery is limited

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [development guide](docs/development.md) for details on:

- Code style and standards
- Testing requirements
- Documentation guidelines
- Pull request process

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

Special thanks to:

- The C language designers for their foundational work
- The Arabic programming community for their support and feedback
- All contributors who have helped shape this project

Commit message:

Add new preprocessor directives and enhance expression evaluation
Implements `#خطأ` and `#تحذير` directives for error and warning messages, enhancing preprocessor functionality. Updates the expression evaluator to support hexadecimal and binary integer literals within conditional directives. Improves error and warning location reporting and revises documentation to reflect these changes.

Addresses known issues with token pasting, macro expansion in conditional expressions, and error/warning precision.

README.md, after:

# B (باء) Programming Language

B (باء) is a programming language designed to support Arabic syntax while maintaining full compatibility with K&R C features. It allows developers to write code using Arabic keywords and identifiers while following established C programming patterns.

## Current Status (v0.1.15.0)

The project now supports:

### Core Features

- **Preprocessor Directives:**
  - `#تضمين <...>` and `#تضمين "..."` (Include files)
  - `#تعريف NAME ...` (Parameterless and function-like macro definition/substitution, **including rescanning of expansion results**).
  - `#خطأ "message"` (Error directive - stops preprocessing) - *[Implemented]*
  - `#تحذير "message"` (Warning directive - prints to stderr, continues) - *[Implemented]*
  - `#الغاء_تعريف NAME` (Undefine macro)
  - Conditional compilation (`#إذا_عرف`, `#إذا_لم_يعرف`, `#إذا`, `#وإلا_إذا`, `#إلا`, `#نهاية_إذا`) with expression evaluation (using `معرف` for `defined`, supports arithmetic, comparison, logical, and **bitwise operators**, and decimal/hex/binary literals).
  - Stringification (`#`) and Token Pasting (`##`) operators in macros.
    - Predefined Arabic macros: `__الملف__` (FILE), `__السطر__` (LINE - expands to integer), `__التاريخ__` (DATE), `__الوقت__` (TIME), `__الدالة__` (expands to placeholder `L"__BAA_FUNCTION_PLACEHOLDER__"`), `__إصدار_المعيار_باء__` (expands to current version, e.g., `10150L`). - *[All Implemented]*
    - Variadic Macros (using `وسائط_إضافية` for `...`, and `__وسائط_متغيرة__` for `__VA_ARGS__`). - *[Implemented]*
    - Other Standard Directives (Planned: `#سطر`, `#براغما`, and `أمر_براغما` operator).

- **Basic Type System (نظام الأنواع الأساسي):** (K&R C compatibility with Arabic keywords)
  - `عدد_صحيح` (int) - 32-bit integer
  - `عدد_حقيقي` (float) - 32-bit float
  - `حرف` (char) - 16-bit UTF-16 character
  - `منطقي` (boolean) - Logical true/false values (`صحيح`, `خطأ`)
  - `فراغ` (void) - No value type
  - (Planned: `عدد_صحيح_طويل_جدا` for long long int)

- **Core Operator System (نظام المعاملات الأساسي):**
  - Arithmetic operators (+, -, *, /, %)
  - Comparison operators (==, !=, <, >, <=, >=)
  - Assignment operator (=)
  - Compound assignment operators (+=, -=, *=, /=, %=)
  - Increment/decrement operators (`++`, `--`)
  - Logical operators (`&&`, `||`, `!`)
  - Type checking and validation
  - Arabic operator names

- **Control Flow Structures (بنى التحكم في التدفق):**
  - `إذا`/`وإلا` (if/else)
  - `طالما` (while)
  - `لكل` (for - uses C-style semicolons internally)
  - `إرجع` (return)
  - `توقف` (break)
  - `أكمل` (continue)
  - `اختر`/`حالة`/`افتراضي` (switch/case/default)
  - (Planned: `افعل` for do-while, `تعداد` for enum)

- **Function System (نظام الدوال):** (Uses C-style declarations: `return_type name(params)`)
  - Regular function parameters
  - Optional parameters (with default values)
  - Rest parameters (variable argument lists)
  - Named arguments support
  - Method vs. function distinction

- Literals
  - **Numeric Literals:**
    - Integers: Decimal (Western `0-9` & Arabic-Indic `٠-٩`), Binary (`0b`/`0B`), Hexadecimal (`0x`/`0X`). (Planned: Arabic suffixes like `غ` for unsigned, `ط` for long, `طط` for long long).
    - Floats: Using `.` or Arabic `٫` as decimal separator. Scientific notation (using `أ` as exponent marker). (Planned: Arabic suffix `ح` for float).
    - Underscores (`_`) supported as separators in all number types.
    - Examples: `123`, `١٢٣غ`, `0b1010طط`, `0xFACEط`, `1_000_000`, `3.14ح`, `٣٫١٤`, `1.5أ-2`.
  - **String Literals:** `"..."` (Planned: Arabic escapes like `\س`, `\م` using `\` as escape char).
  - **Character Literals:** `'...'` (Planned: Arabic escapes like `\س`, `\م` using `\` as escape char).
  - **Boolean Literals:** `صحيح` (true), `خطأ` (false).
  - (Planned: `تعداد` keyword for enumerations).
  - (Planned: Struct/union member access using `::` for direct and `->` for pointer).

- Arabic File Support
  - Native `.ب` extension
  - UTF-16LE encoding support
  - Arabic file naming
  - Build system integration

For detailed information about Arabic support, see [Arabic Support Documentation](docs/arabic_support.md).

### Project Status Overview

#### What's Working

- **Preprocessor**: Handles includes (`#تضمين`), object-like and function-like macros (`#تعريف` with parameters, including variadic macros using `وسائط_إضافية`/`__وسائط_متغيرة__`, `#`, `##`, and **rescanning**), undefines (`#الغاء_تعريف`), conditional compilation (including expression evaluation for `#إذا`/`#وإلا_إذا`), predefined Arabic macros (`__الملف__`, `__السطر__` (as integer), `__التاريخ__`, `__الوقت__`). Error reporting is unified and provides original source locations (file, line, column).
- **Core Architecture**: Well-defined architecture with clear separation of concerns.
- **Type System**: Basic types including Boolean, type conversion rules, and type checking
- **AST (Abstract Syntax Tree)**: Comprehensive node structure, program, function nodes, enhanced parameter handling
- **Lexer**: UTF-16LE file processing (from preprocessor output). Modularized structure. Robust token recognition for keywords, identifiers (Arabic/English), types, boolean literals, all operators. Advanced numeric literal scanning (Arabic-Indic digits, binary/hex prefixes, underscores, Arabic decimal separator `٫`, scientific notation). String and character literal scanning with standard and Unicode escapes. Accurate line/column tracking and error reporting.
- **Parser**: Recursive descent implementation, expression parsing with precedence, statement parsing
- **Utils**: Memory management, string handling, error infrastructure
- **Preprocessor integration with include and basic macro support.**

#### What's Not Working

- **Code Generation**: LLVM integration is incomplete, mostly placeholder code
- **Parser Integration**: Individual components exist but full integration is incomplete
- **Standard Library**: Defined but not implemented
- **Testing Infrastructure**: Framework defined but implementation is limited

#### What Needs Improvement

- **Arabic Support**: RTL text handling, more comprehensive error messages
- **Error Handling**: More detailed messages, better recovery mechanisms. **Preprocessor error/warning location precision for directives.**
- **Documentation**: Generally updated and consolidated. Specific component details may need further review.
- **Build System**: Cross-platform support, dependency management

#### What Needs Fixing

- **Lexer Issues**: UTF-16LE handling, Arabic character recognition
- **Parser Issues**: Expression precedence, statement termination, control flow parsing
- **Memory Management**: Potential leaks, inconsistent allocation
- **Preprocessor Known Issues**: Token pasting (`##`) during rescanning (complex cases), full macro expansion in conditional expressions.
- **Integration Issues**: Component integration, compilation pipeline gaps

### Changelog

**Added:**

- Boolean type (منطقي) with literals صحيح (true) and خطأ (false)
- Compound assignment operators (+=, -=, *=, /=, %=)
- Increment/decrement operators (++, --)
- Enhanced function parameter handling (optional, rest, named arguments)
- Method vs. function distinction in AST
- Enhanced parser debug output for better troubleshooting
- Test files for Arabic program parsing
- UTF-8 support for Arabic identifiers in the parser
- LLVM code generation infrastructure (placeholder)
- Improved error handling system (including unified preprocessor error reporting)

**Changed:**

- Refactored parser functions for improved error handling
- Simplified number parsing (temporarily removed decimal support)
- Improved error messages with more context
- Updated project structure to match architecture documentation
- Focus on Parser Enhancements, Code Generation, Lexer Enhancements, and AST Improvements.
- *See [docs/roadmap.md](docs/roadmap.md) for the high-level plan and component-specific roadmaps (e.g., `docs/LEXER_ROADMAP.md`, `docs/PREPROCESSOR_ROADMAP.md`) for details.*

**Fixed:**

- Memory leaks in parser error handling
- Function declaration parsing
- Identifier parsing for UTF-16LE characters
- File handling for UTF-16LE encoded files

### Roadmap

**Completed Features:**

- Core components (AST, Type System, Operators, Memory Management, Error Handling)
- Advanced operators (compound assignment, increment/decrement)
- Boolean type support
- Enhanced function parameter system
- Arabic support (UTF-16LE encoding, Arabic identifiers, Basic RTL support, Arabic error messages)
- Documentation (Language specification, Arabic support guide, C comparison, Architecture overview, Component documentation)

**In Progress:**

- Parser Development (Grammar definition, Token handling, Error recovery, Source location tracking)
- Code Generation (LLVM integration planning, Basic code emission, Debug information support)
- Standard Library (Basic I/O functions, String manipulation, Memory management, File operations)

**Short-term Goals (0.2.0):**

- Focus on Parser Enhancements, Code Generation, Lexer Enhancements, and AST Improvements.
- *See [docs/roadmap.md](docs/roadmap.md) for the high-level plan and component-specific roadmaps (e.g., `docs/LEXER_ROADMAP.md`) for details.*

### Project Structure

```
baa/
├── include/
│   └── baa/           # Public header files
│       ├── ast/       # AST definitions
│       ├── lexer/     # Lexer interface
│       ├── parser/    # Parser interface
│       ├── preprocessor/ # Preprocessor interface
│       ├── types/     # Type system interface
│       ├── utils/     # Utility functions
│       └── codegen/   # Code generation interface
├── src/
│   ├── ast/          # AST implementation
│   ├── lexer/        # Lexer implementation
│   ├── parser/       # Parser implementation
│   ├── preprocessor/ # Preprocessor implementation
│   ├── types/        # Type system implementation
│   ├── operators/    # Operator system implementation
│   ├── codegen/      # Code generation (incomplete)
│   ├── utils/        # Utility functions
│   ├── control_flow/ # Control flow implementation
│   ├── compiler.c    # Main compilation logic
│   └── main.c        # Executable entry point
├── tests/
│   ├── unit/         # Unit tests (limited)
│   └── integration/  # Integration tests (placeholder)
└── docs/             # Documentation
    ├── preprocessor.md     # Preprocessor documentation
    ├── PREPROCESSOR_ROADMAP.md # Detailed Preprocessor roadmap
    ├── architecture.md     # System architecture overview & component status
    ├── language.md         # Language specification
    ├── project_structure.md # Detailed directory layout (Arabic)
    ├── roadmap.md          # High-level development roadmap
    ├── lexer.md            # Lexer structure & usage
    ├── LEXER_ROADMAP.md    # Detailed Lexer roadmap
    ├── AST_STRUCTURE.md    # AST structure details
    ├── AST_ROADMAP.md      # Detailed AST roadmap
    ├── PARSER_STRUCTURE.md # Parser structure details
    ├── PARSER_ROADMAP.md   # Detailed Parser roadmap
    ├── arabic_support.md   # Arabic support details
    ├── c_comparison.md     # Comparison with C
    ├── development.md      # Developer guide
    └── ...                 # Other specific docs
```

## Building from Source

### Prerequisites

- CMake 3.20 or higher
- K&R C compliant compiler
- Git for version control
- LLVM development libraries (optional, for code generation)
- Unicode support libraries

### Build Steps

```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd baa
mkdir build && cd build
cmake ..
cmake --build .
```

### Running Tests

```bash
cd build
ctest --output-on-failure
```

### Preprocessor Tester

A standalone tool is available to test the preprocessor in isolation:

```bash
# After building the project:
./build/bin/baa_preprocessor_tester <path/to/your/file.baa>
```

Note: The preprocessor currently expects input files to be encoded in UTF-16LE with a BOM.

## Features

### Type Safety

- Strong type checking
- Explicit conversion rules
- Error type for invalid operations
- UTF-16 support for Arabic text

### Operator System

- Type-safe operations
- Arabic operator names
- K&R C operator precedence
- Comprehensive error handling

### Documentation

- Detailed Arabic error messages
- Comprehensive documentation in both English and Arabic
- Examples and usage guides
- Development guidelines

## File Extensions

The Baa programming language supports two file extensions:

- `.ب` - The primary Arabic file extension
- `.baa` - Alternative Latin file extension

### Example Program

```baa
#تضمين <مكتبة_طباعة> // Assuming a Baa standard library header
#تعريف EXIT_SUCCESS 0

// مثال برنامج بسيط بلغة باء
// Baa uses C-style function declarations
عدد_صحيح رئيسية() {
    اطبع("مرحباً بالعالم!").
    إرجع EXIT_SUCCESS.
}
```

## Known Issues and Limitations

- Code generation is not fully implemented yet
- Complex language constructs may not parse correctly
- Error messages may not be fully localized
- Limited testing coverage
- UTF-16LE handling has edge cases with certain characters
- Parser error recovery is limited

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [development guide](docs/development.md) for details on:

- Code style and standards
- Testing requirements
- Documentation guidelines
- Pull request process

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

Special thanks to:

- The C language designers for their foundational work
- The Arabic programming community for their support and feedback
- All contributors who have helped shape this project
