docs/c_comparison.md, before:

# K&R C and B (باء) Comparison

## Overview

This document compares K&R C features with their B (باء) equivalents and outlines the implementation roadmap for achieving full K&R C compatibility.

## Language Features

### Basic Types

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| `char`        | `حرف`             | Implemented | 16-bit (`wchar_t`) for Unicode support in Baa. |
| `int`         | `عدد_صحيح`        | Implemented | 32-bit integer (`int`). |
| `float`       | `عدد_حقيقي`      | Implemented | 32-bit floating point (`float`). |
| `void`        | `فراغ`            | Implemented | Type exists. |
| _Bool/bool    | `منطقي`           | Implemented | Boolean type exists; Baa uses `صحيح`/`خطأ` literals. |

### Derived Types

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status   | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|----------|-------|
| Arrays        | `مصفوفة`          | Partial  | AST/Type support exists (`BAA_TYPE_ARRAY`, `BAA_EXPR_ARRAY`, `BAA_EXPR_INDEX`). Semantics/analysis likely incomplete. |
| Pointers      | `مؤشر`            | Planned  | Mentioned in docs, but no clear AST/Type support observed. |
| Structures    | `بنية`            | Planned  | Mentioned in docs, but no clear AST/Type support observed. |
| Unions        | `اتحاد`           | Planned  | Mentioned in docs, but no clear AST/Type support observed. |

### Storage Classes

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status   | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|----------|-------|
| `auto`        | `تلقائي`          | N/A      | Baa uses type inference or explicit types; `auto` concept less relevant. Keyword not observed. |
| `static`      | `ثابت` (?)        | Planned  | `ثابت` keyword exists, likely maps to `const`. Static storage duration needs verification. |
| `extern`      | `خارجي`           | Planned  | Keyword exists (`is_extern` flag on `BaaFunction`). Full semantic handling needed. |
| `register`    | `سجل`             | Planned  | Keyword not observed; likely low priority. |

### Type Qualifiers

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status   | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|----------|-------|
| `const`       | `ثابت`            | Partial  | Keyword `ثابت` exists and is parsed. Semantic enforcement needed. |
| `volatile`    | `متطاير`          | Planned  | Keyword not observed. |

### Control Flow

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| `if`          | `إذا`             | Implemented | AST/Parsing exists. |
| `else`        | `وإلا`            | Implemented | AST/Parsing exists. |
| `while`       | `طالما`           | Implemented | AST/Parsing exists. |
| `do`          | `افعل`            | Partial     | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_DO`). AST/Parsing implementation status unclear. |
| `for`         | `من_أجل`          | Partial     | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_FOR`). AST/Parsing exists (`BaaForStmt`). Semantic analysis likely incomplete. |
| `switch`      | `اختر`            | Partial     | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_SWITCH`). AST/Parsing exists (`BaaSwitchStmt`). Semantic analysis likely incomplete. |
| `case`        | `حالة`            | Partial     | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_CASE`). AST/Parsing exists (`BaaCaseStmt`). Semantic analysis likely incomplete. |
| `break`       | `توقف`            | Implemented | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_BREAK`). AST/Parsing exists. Basic flow analysis check implemented. |
| `continue`    | `أكمل` (?)        | Implemented | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_CONTINUE`). AST/Parsing exists. Basic flow analysis check implemented. |
| `return`      | `إرجع`            | Implemented | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_RETURN`). AST/Parsing exists. |
| `goto`        | `اذهب`            | Planned     | Keyword not observed in lexer/parser implementation. |

### Operators

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| Arithmetic    | Same symbols       | Implemented | +, -, *, /, %. Basic type validation exists. |
| Comparison    | Same symbols       | Implemented | ==, !=, <, >, <=, >=. Basic type validation exists. |
| Logical       | Same symbols       | Implemented | &&, ||, !. Basic type validation for `!` exists. `&&`/`||` need validation logic. |
| Bitwise       | Same symbols       | Partial     | &, |, ^, <<, >>, ~. Keywords exist. Type validation logic missing. |
| Assignment    | Same symbols       | Implemented | =. Basic type validation exists. |
| Compound Assignment | Same symbols | Implemented | +=, -=, *=, /=, %=. AST/Parsing exists. Type validation logic missing. |
| Increment/Decrement | Same symbols | Implemented | ++, --. AST/Parsing exists. Type validation logic missing. |
| Address       | Same symbols       | Planned     | &, *. Requires pointer implementation. |
| Sizeof        | `حجم`             | Planned     | Keyword not observed in lexer/parser implementation. |

### Boolean Literals

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| `1` (typically) | `صحيح`          | Implemented | Boolean true literal (`true` is C99+). |
| `0` (typically) | `خطأ`           | Implemented | Boolean false literal (`false` is C99+). |

### Function Parameters

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Extension | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|-------------------|-------------|-------|
| Basic parameters | Basic parameters | Implemented | Standard function parameters. |
| Default values | Optional parameters | Partial?    | AST (`BaaParameter`) supports `is_optional`, `default_value`. Parser/analysis support needs verification. |
| Variadic functions | Rest parameters | Partial?    | AST (`BaaParameter`) supports `is_rest`. Parser/analysis support needs verification. |
| - | Named arguments | Partial?    | AST (`BaaCallExpr`) supports `named_args`. Parser/analysis support needs verification. |
| - | Method distinction | Partial?    | AST (`BaaFunction`) supports `is_method`. Usage/semantics unclear. |

### Preprocessor

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| `#include`    | `تضمين#`          | Partial     | Basic directive handled directly by parser (`parse_import_directive`). Full preprocessing stage planned. |
| `#define`     | `تعريف#`          | Planned     | No macro handling observed. |
| `#ifdef`      | `إذا_عرف#`        | Planned     | No conditional compilation observed. |
| `#endif`      | `نهاية_إذا#`      | Planned     | No conditional compilation observed. |
| `#undef`      | `إلغاء_تعريف#`    | Planned     | No macro handling observed. |

### Standard Library

**(Note: Status reflects availability of Baa function names/bindings, not necessarily full K&R C implementation completeness/correctness)**

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status   | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|----------|-------|
| `printf`      | `اطبع`            | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `scanf`       | `اقرأ`            | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `fopen`       | `افتح_ملف`        | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `fclose`      | `اغلق_ملف`        | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `malloc`      | `حجز_ذاكرة`       | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists (maybe `baa_malloc` internally), implementation details unknown. |
| `free`        | `حرر_ذاكرة`       | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists (maybe `baa_free` internally), implementation details unknown. |
| `strcpy`      | `نسخ_نص`          | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `strlen`      | `طول_نص`          | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `strcmp`      | `مقارنة_نص`       | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |

## Implementation Roadmap

**(This section has been removed as it was inconsistent with detailed component status. Please refer to `docs/roadmap.md` and component-specific roadmaps like `docs/LEXER_ROADMAP.md`, `docs/PARSER_ROADMAP.md`, etc. for detailed status and future plans.)**

## Extensions Beyond K&R C

### Unicode Support

- 16-bit character type (`wchar_t`) - `Implemented`
- UTF-16LE string literals - `Implemented` (Lexer assumes UTF-16LE input)
- Arabic identifier support - `Implemented`
- Bidirectional text handling - `N/A` (Considered an editor/terminal concern)

### Error Messages

- Arabic language error messages - `Partial` (Number parsing only; general errors planned)
- Enhanced error recovery - `Planned` (Basic parser synchronization planned)
- Detailed diagnostic information - `Planned`
- Context-aware suggestions - `Planned`

### Development Tools

- Interactive debugger - `Planned`
- Performance profiler - `Planned`
- Memory analyzer - `Planned`
- Documentation generator - `Planned`

### Modern Features

- Source code formatting - `Planned`
- Static analysis - `Planned`
- Code completion - `Planned`
- Refactoring tools - `Planned`

## Compatibility Notes

### Source Code

- K&R C source code requires syntax changes (keywords, statement terminator `.`), type adjustments (e.g., `char` size), and UTF-16LE encoding conversion for Baa compilation.
- Arabic keywords can be used alongside English identifiers - `Implemented` (Lexer/Parser support this).
- UTF-16LE encoding required for source files - `Implemented` (Lexer assumes this).
- Bidirectional text support in string literals - `Implemented` (Supported via `wchar_t`).

### Binary Compatibility

- Generated object files are compatible with C linkers - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Standard C calling convention - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Standard C ABI compliance - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Platform-specific alignment rules - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).

### Standard Library

- K&R C standard library functions available - `Unknown` / `Planned`.
- Arabic function names provided as aliases - `Unknown` / `Planned`.
- Extended Unicode support functions - `Unknown` / `Planned`.
- Additional helper functions for Arabic text - `Unknown` / `Planned`.

### Tool Integration

- Compatible with standard C debuggers - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Works with common build systems - `Implemented` (CMake).
- Supports standard profiling tools - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Integrates with popular IDEs - `Planned`.

## Syntax Comparison (مقارنة التركيب)

### Basic Program Structure

```c
// C Version
int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

```baa
// Baa Version
دالة رئيسية() {
    اطبع("مرحباً بالعالم!").
    إرجع 0.
}
```

### Variable Declaration

```c
// C Version
int count = 0;
float price = 10.5;
char letter = 'A';
```

```baa
// Baa Version
عدد_صحيح عداد = 0.
عدد_حقيقي سعر = 10.5.
حرف حرف = 'أ'.
```

### Control Structures

```c
// C Version
if (age >= 18) {
    printf("Adult\n");
} else {
    printf("Minor\n");
}

while (count < 10) {
    count++;
}
```

```baa
// Baa Version
إذا (عمر >= 18) {
    اطبع("بالغ").
} وإلا {
    اطبع("قاصر").
}

طالما (عداد < 10) {
    عداد++.
}
```

## Feature Comparison (مقارنة الميزات)

### 1. Types (الأنواع)

| C Type | Baa Type | Size | Notes |
|--------|----------|------|-------|
| int | عدد_صحيح | 32-bit | Same range |
| float | عدد_حقيقي | 32-bit | Same precision |
| char | حرف | 8-bit | UTF-8 in Baa |
| void | فراغ | - | Same usage |
| struct | بنية | varies | Same layout |
| union | اتحاد | varies | Same usage |

### 2. Operators (العمليات)

| Category | C | Baa | Notes |
|----------|---|-----|-------|
| Arithmetic | +, -, *, /, % | جمع, طرح, ضرب, قسمة, باقي | Same precedence |
| Comparison | ==, !=, <, > | يساوي, لا_يساوي, أصغر_من, أكبر_من | Same behavior |
| Logical | &&, \|\|, ! | و, أو, ليس | Same rules |
| Bitwise | &, \|, ^, ~, <<, >> | Same | Not localized |

### 3. Keywords (الكلمات المفتاحية)

| C | Baa | Notes |
|---|-----|-------|
| if | إذا | Same semantics |
| else | وإلا | Same usage |
| while | طالما | Same behavior |
| for | من_أجل | Same structure |
| return | إرجع | Same purpose |
| struct | بنية | Same memory layout |
| typedef | نوع_مستخدم | Same functionality |

## Memory Model (نموذج الذاكرة)

- Same stack and heap organization
- Identical pointer arithmetic
- Compatible struct padding
- Similar alignment rules

## Standard Library (المكتبة القياسية)

| C Function | Baa Function | Purpose |
|------------|-------------|----------|
| printf | اطبع | Output text |
| scanf | اقرأ | Input text |
| malloc | احجز | Allocate memory |
| free | حرر | Free memory |
| strlen | طول_نص | String length |
| strcpy | انسخ_نص | String copy |

## Compilation Process (عملية الترجمة)

1. **Preprocessing**
   - C: #include, #define
   - Baa: تضمين#, تعريف#

2. **Compilation**
   - Both generate similar intermediate code
   - Baa adds Arabic symbol handling

3. **Linking**
   - Compatible object file format
   - Same linking process

## Key Differences (الفروق الرئيسية)

### 1. Text Handling

- Baa uses UTF-8 by default
- Better support for Arabic text
- RTL text rendering
- Arabic string literals

### 2. Error Messages

- Baa provides Arabic error messages
- More detailed error descriptions
- Cultural context in messages
- Bilingual support

### 3. Development Tools

- Arabic-aware debugger
- RTL-compatible editors
- Arabic documentation
- Localized tooling

### 4. Extensions

- Arabic identifier support
- RTL code formatting
- Arabic documentation comments
- Cultural adaptations

## Migration Guide (دليل الترحيل)

### From C to Baa

1. Convert keywords to Arabic
2. Update type names
3. Translate identifiers
4. Adjust string encoding
5. Update comments

### From Baa to C

1. Convert keywords to English
2. Restore C type names
3. Transliterate identifiers
4. Convert UTF-8 strings
5. Translate comments

## Best Practices (أفضل الممارسات)

### 1. Code Style

- Consistent language choice
- Clear naming conventions
- Proper text direction
- Cultural considerations

### 2. Interoperability

- Use compatible types
- Maintain C ABI
- Document translations
- Handle encodings

## Version Compatibility (توافق الإصدارات)

- Version 0.1.7: Basic C compatibility
- Version 0.1.8: Enhanced features
  - Better error messages
  - Improved type system
  - Extended standard library
  - More Arabic keywords

Commit message:

Adds conditional compilation support to preprocessor
Introduces a conditional stack to manage active/inactive code blocks
Implements functions to handle conditional directives (#ifdef, #endif)
Updates error handling for unterminated conditional blocks
Refactors code for consistent formatting and improved readability

Fixes potential memory allocation issues and improves robustness

Enables preprocessor directives and float literals

Extends preprocessor functionality to include macro undefinition and conditional compilation.

Improves lexer to recognize float literals based on syntax.

Updates documentation to reflect these changes and include details on comments.

Enhances preprocessor conditional handling

Refines conditional stack logic to support nested conditions and branching (#else/#endif).
Introduces a secondary stack to track branch states, improving skipping logic.
Adds support for localized conditional directives like #إذا_عرف and #إذا_لم_يعرف.

Prepares for future #elif handling. Fixes potential state inconsistencies.

docs/c_comparison.md, after:

# K&R C and B (باء) Comparison

## Overview

This document compares K&R C features with their B (باء) equivalents and outlines the implementation roadmap for achieving full K&R C compatibility.

## Language Features

### Basic Types

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| `char`        | `حرف`             | Implemented | 16-bit (`wchar_t`) for Unicode support in Baa. |
| `int`         | `عدد_صحيح`        | Implemented | 32-bit integer (`int`). |
| `float`       | `عدد_حقيقي`      | Implemented | 32-bit floating point (`float`). |
| `void`        | `فراغ`            | Implemented | Type exists. |
| _Bool/bool    | `منطقي`           | Implemented | Boolean type exists; Baa uses `صحيح`/`خطأ` literals. |

### Derived Types

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status   | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|----------|-------|
| Arrays        | `مصفوفة`          | Partial  | AST/Type support exists (`BAA_TYPE_ARRAY`, `BAA_EXPR_ARRAY`, `BAA_EXPR_INDEX`). Semantics/analysis likely incomplete. |
| Pointers      | `مؤشر`            | Planned  | Mentioned in docs, but no clear AST/Type support observed. |
| Structures    | `بنية`            | Planned  | Mentioned in docs, but no clear AST/Type support observed. |
| Unions        | `اتحاد`           | Planned  | Mentioned in docs, but no clear AST/Type support observed. |

### Storage Classes

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status   | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|----------|-------|
| `auto`        | `تلقائي`          | N/A      | Baa uses type inference or explicit types; `auto` concept less relevant. Keyword not observed. |
| `static`      | `ثابت` (?)        | Planned  | `ثابت` keyword exists, likely maps to `const`. Static storage duration needs verification. |
| `extern`      | `خارجي`           | Planned  | Keyword exists (`is_extern` flag on `BaaFunction`). Full semantic handling needed. |
| `register`    | `سجل`             | Planned  | Keyword not observed; likely low priority. |

### Type Qualifiers

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status   | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|----------|-------|
| `const`       | `ثابت`            | Partial  | Keyword `ثابت` exists and is parsed. Semantic enforcement needed. |
| `volatile`    | `متطاير`          | Planned  | Keyword not observed. |

### Control Flow

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| `if`          | `إذا`             | Implemented | AST/Parsing exists. |
| `else`        | `وإلا`            | Implemented | AST/Parsing exists. |
| `while`       | `طالما`           | Implemented | AST/Parsing exists. |
| `do`          | `افعل`            | Partial     | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_DO`). AST/Parsing implementation status unclear. |
| `for`         | `من_أجل`          | Partial     | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_FOR`). AST/Parsing exists (`BaaForStmt`). Semantic analysis likely incomplete. |
| `switch`      | `اختر`            | Partial     | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_SWITCH`). AST/Parsing exists (`BaaSwitchStmt`). Semantic analysis likely incomplete. |
| `case`        | `حالة`            | Partial     | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_CASE`). AST/Parsing exists (`BaaCaseStmt`). Semantic analysis likely incomplete. |
| `break`       | `توقف`            | Implemented | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_BREAK`). AST/Parsing exists. Basic flow analysis check implemented. |
| `continue`    | `أكمل` (?)        | Implemented | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_CONTINUE`). AST/Parsing exists. Basic flow analysis check implemented. |
| `return`      | `إرجع`            | Implemented | Keyword exists (`BAA_TOKEN_RETURN`). AST/Parsing exists. |
| `goto`        | `اذهب`            | Planned     | Keyword not observed in lexer/parser implementation. |

### Operators

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| Arithmetic    | Same symbols       | Implemented | +, -, *, /, %. Basic type validation exists. |
| Comparison    | Same symbols       | Implemented | ==, !=, <, >, <=, >=. Basic type validation exists. |
| Logical       | Same symbols       | Implemented | &&, ||, !. Basic type validation for `!` exists. `&&`/`||` need validation logic. |
| Bitwise       | Same symbols       | Partial     | &, |, ^, <<, >>, ~. Keywords exist. Type validation logic missing. |
| Assignment    | Same symbols       | Implemented | =. Basic type validation exists. |
| Compound Assignment | Same symbols | Implemented | +=, -=, *=, /=, %=. AST/Parsing exists. Type validation logic missing. |
| Increment/Decrement | Same symbols | Implemented | ++, --. AST/Parsing exists. Type validation logic missing. |
| Address       | Same symbols       | Planned     | &, *. Requires pointer implementation. |
| Sizeof        | `حجم`             | Planned     | Keyword not observed in lexer/parser implementation. |

### Boolean Literals

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| `1` (typically) | `صحيح`          | Implemented | Boolean true literal (`true` is C99+). |
| `0` (typically) | `خطأ`           | Implemented | Boolean false literal (`false` is C99+). |

### Function Parameters

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Extension | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|-------------------|-------------|-------|
| Basic parameters | Basic parameters | Implemented | Standard function parameters. |
| Default values | Optional parameters | Partial?    | AST (`BaaParameter`) supports `is_optional`, `default_value`. Parser/analysis support needs verification. |
| Variadic functions | Rest parameters | Partial?    | AST (`BaaParameter`) supports `is_rest`. Parser/analysis support needs verification. |
| - | Named arguments | Partial?    | AST (`BaaCallExpr`) supports `named_args`. Parser/analysis support needs verification. |
| - | Method distinction | Partial?    | AST (`BaaFunction`) supports `is_method`. Usage/semantics unclear. |

### Preprocessor

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status      | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|-------------|-------|
| `#include`    | `#تضمين`          | Implemented | Handled by the external `baa_preprocess` function. |
| `#define`     | `#تعريف`          | Implemented | Parameterless macros handled by `baa_preprocess`. |
| `#ifdef`      | `#إذا_عرف`        | Implemented | Handled by `baa_preprocess`. |
| `#ifndef`     | `#إذا_لم_يعرف`    | Implemented | Handled by `baa_preprocess`. |
| `#else`       | `#إلا`            | Implemented | Handled by `baa_preprocess`. |
| `#endif`      | `#نهاية_إذا`      | Implemented | Handled by `baa_preprocess`. |
| `#undef`      | `#الغاء_تعريف`    | Implemented | Handled by `baa_preprocess`. |

### Standard Library

**(Note: Status reflects availability of Baa function names/bindings, not necessarily full K&R C implementation completeness/correctness)**

| K&R C Feature | B (باء) Equivalent | Status   | Notes |
|---------------|--------------------|----------|-------|
| `printf`      | `اطبع`            | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `scanf`       | `اقرأ`            | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `fopen`       | `افتح_ملف`        | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `fclose`      | `اغلق_ملف`        | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `malloc`      | `حجز_ذاكرة`       | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists (maybe `baa_malloc` internally), implementation details unknown. |
| `free`        | `حرر_ذاكرة`       | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists (maybe `baa_free` internally), implementation details unknown. |
| `strcpy`      | `نسخ_نص`          | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `strlen`      | `طول_نص`          | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |
| `strcmp`      | `مقارنة_نص`       | Unknown  | Baa function likely exists, implementation details unknown. |

## Implementation Roadmap

**(This section has been removed as it was inconsistent with detailed component status. Please refer to `docs/roadmap.md` and component-specific roadmaps like `docs/LEXER_ROADMAP.md`, `docs/PARSER_ROADMAP.md`, etc. for detailed status and future plans.)**

## Extensions Beyond K&R C

### Unicode Support

- 16-bit character type (`wchar_t`) - `Implemented`
- UTF-16LE string literals - `Implemented` (Lexer assumes UTF-16LE input)
- Arabic identifier support - `Implemented`
- Bidirectional text handling - `N/A` (Considered an editor/terminal concern)

### Error Messages

- Arabic language error messages - `Partial` (Number parsing only; general errors planned)
- Enhanced error recovery - `Planned` (Basic parser synchronization planned)
- Detailed diagnostic information - `Planned`
- Context-aware suggestions - `Planned`

### Development Tools

- Interactive debugger - `Planned`
- Performance profiler - `Planned`
- Memory analyzer - `Planned`
- Documentation generator - `Planned`

### Modern Features

- Source code formatting - `Planned`
- Static analysis - `Planned`
- Code completion - `Planned`
- Refactoring tools - `Planned`

## Compatibility Notes

### Source Code

- K&R C source code requires syntax changes (keywords, statement terminator `.`), type adjustments (e.g., `char` size), and UTF-16LE encoding conversion for Baa compilation.
- Arabic keywords can be used alongside English identifiers - `Implemented` (Lexer/Parser support this).
- UTF-16LE encoding required for source files - `Implemented` (Lexer assumes this).
- Bidirectional text support in string literals - `Implemented` (Supported via `wchar_t`).

### Binary Compatibility

- Generated object files are compatible with C linkers - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Standard C calling convention - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Standard C ABI compliance - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Platform-specific alignment rules - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).

### Standard Library

- K&R C standard library functions available - `Unknown` / `Planned`.
- Arabic function names provided as aliases - `Unknown` / `Planned`.
- Extended Unicode support functions - `Unknown` / `Planned`.
- Additional helper functions for Arabic text - `Unknown` / `Planned`.

### Tool Integration

- Compatible with standard C debuggers - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Works with common build systems - `Implemented` (CMake).
- Supports standard profiling tools - `N/A` (Code generation not implemented).
- Integrates with popular IDEs - `Planned`.

## Syntax Comparison (مقارنة التركيب)

### Basic Program Structure

```c
// C Version
int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

```baa
// Baa Version
دالة رئيسية() {
    اطبع("مرحباً بالعالم!").
    إرجع 0.
}
```

### Variable Declaration

```c
// C Version
int count = 0;
float price = 10.5;
char letter = 'A';
```

```baa
// Baa Version
عدد_صحيح عداد = 0.
عدد_حقيقي سعر = 10.5.
حرف حرف = 'أ'.
```

### Control Structures

```c
// C Version
if (age >= 18) {
    printf("Adult\n");
} else {
    printf("Minor\n");
}

while (count < 10) {
    count++;
}
```

```baa
// Baa Version
إذا (عمر >= 18) {
    اطبع("بالغ").
} وإلا {
    اطبع("قاصر").
}

طالما (عداد < 10) {
    عداد++.
}
```

## Feature Comparison (مقارنة الميزات)

### 1. Types (الأنواع)

| C Type | Baa Type | Size | Notes |
|--------|----------|------|-------|
| int | عدد_صحيح | 32-bit | Same range |
| float | عدد_حقيقي | 32-bit | Same precision |
| char | حرف | 8-bit | UTF-8 in Baa |
| void | فراغ | - | Same usage |
| struct | بنية | varies | Same layout |
| union | اتحاد | varies | Same usage |

### 2. Operators (العمليات)

| Category | C | Baa | Notes |
|----------|---|-----|-------|
| Arithmetic | +, -, *, /, % | جمع, طرح, ضرب, قسمة, باقي | Same precedence |
| Comparison | ==, !=, <, > | يساوي, لا_يساوي, أصغر_من, أكبر_من | Same behavior |
| Logical | &&, \|\|, ! | و, أو, ليس | Same rules |
| Bitwise | &, \|, ^, ~, <<, >> | Same | Not localized |

### 3. Keywords (الكلمات المفتاحية)

| C | Baa | Notes |
|---|-----|-------|
| if | إذا | Same semantics |
| else | وإلا | Same usage |
| while | طالما | Same behavior |
| for | من_أجل | Same structure |
| return | إرجع | Same purpose |
| struct | بنية | Same memory layout |
| typedef | نوع_مستخدم | Same functionality |

## Memory Model (نموذج الذاكرة)

- Same stack and heap organization
- Identical pointer arithmetic
- Compatible struct padding
- Similar alignment rules

## Standard Library (المكتبة القياسية)

| C Function | Baa Function | Purpose |
|------------|-------------|----------|
| printf | اطبع | Output text |
| scanf | اقرأ | Input text |
| malloc | احجز | Allocate memory |
| free | حرر | Free memory |
| strlen | طول_نص | String length |
| strcpy | انسخ_نص | String copy |

## Compilation Process (عملية الترجمة)

1. **Preprocessing**
   - C: #include, #define
   - Baa: تضمين#, تعريف#

2. **Compilation**
   - Both generate similar intermediate code
   - Baa adds Arabic symbol handling

3. **Linking**
   - Compatible object file format
   - Same linking process

## Key Differences (الفروق الرئيسية)

### 1. Text Handling

- Baa uses UTF-8 by default
- Better support for Arabic text
- RTL text rendering
- Arabic string literals

### 2. Error Messages

- Baa provides Arabic error messages
- More detailed error descriptions
- Cultural context in messages
- Bilingual support

### 3. Development Tools

- Arabic-aware debugger
- RTL-compatible editors
- Arabic documentation
- Localized tooling

### 4. Extensions

- Arabic identifier support
- RTL code formatting
- Arabic documentation comments
- Cultural adaptations

## Migration Guide (دليل الترحيل)

### From C to Baa

1. Convert keywords to Arabic
2. Update type names
3. Translate identifiers
4. Adjust string encoding
5. Update comments

### From Baa to C

1. Convert keywords to English
2. Restore C type names
3. Transliterate identifiers
4. Convert UTF-8 strings
5. Translate comments

## Best Practices (أفضل الممارسات)

### 1. Code Style

- Consistent language choice
- Clear naming conventions
- Proper text direction
- Cultural considerations

### 2. Interoperability

- Use compatible types
- Maintain C ABI
- Document translations
- Handle encodings

## Version Compatibility (توافق الإصدارات)

- Version 0.1.7: Basic C compatibility
- Version 0.1.8: Enhanced features
  - Better error messages
  - Improved type system
  - Extended standard library
  - More Arabic keywords
