docs/lexer.md, before:

# Baa Lexer Documentation

## Overview

The Baa lexer processes source code written in the Baa language, which includes strong support for Arabic. **Note: The lexer operates on the source code *after* it has been processed by the Baa Preprocessor, which handles directives like `#تضمين`.** It reads the resulting (potentially combined) source, assumed to be encoded in UTF-16LE, and uses wide characters (`wchar_t`) internally. The lexer tokenizes Arabic identifiers, keywords, and literals, while maintaining precise source location tracking (line and column numbers). It converts the processed text into a stream of tokens that can be consumed by the parser.

## Features

### Arabic Language Support

- Recognizes Arabic letters from multiple Unicode ranges (0x0600-0x06FF, FB50-FDFF, FE70-FEFF) for identifiers.
- Recognizes Arabic-Indic digits (٠-٩) in identifiers and number literals.
- Recognizes Arabic keywords (e.g., `دالة`, `إذا`).
- Supports Arabic characters within string literals.
- Note: Bidirectional text display is dependent on the terminal/editor, not explicitly managed by the lexer logic itself.
- Note: Standard C-style comments (`//`, `/* */`) are supported and skipped. Legacy `#` style comments are no longer supported by the lexer (preprocessor handles `#` for directives).

### Token Types

The lexer identifies the following categories of tokens:

- Keywords (كلمات مفتاحية)
- Identifiers (معرفات)
- Literals (قيم حرفية)
  - Numbers (أرقام - Scanned as `BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT` or `BAA_TOKEN_FLOAT_LIT` based on syntax. Value parsing may occur later.)
  - Strings (نصوص - `BAA_TOKEN_STRING_LIT`)
  - Boolean (قيم منطقية - `BAA_TOKEN_BOOL_LIT`, scanned via `صحيح`/`خطأ` keywords)
  - Characters (حروف - `BAA_TOKEN_CHAR_LIT`, scanned via `'c'` syntax)
- Type Names (أسماء الأنواع - e.g., `عدد_صحيح`, `منطقي` scanned as specific `BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_*`)
- Operators (عوامل - e.g., `+`, `==`, `+=`, `&&`, `++`)
- Delimiters (فواصل - e.g., `(`, `;`, `{`)
- Comments (تعليقات - `//`, `/* */` style comments are skipped, not tokenized. `#` is handled by the preprocessor.)

### Source Location Tracking

- Line and column tracking
- File position management
- Error location reporting

### Error Handling

- Returns a `BAA_TOKEN_ERROR` token when an issue is encountered (e.g., unexpected character, unterminated string/char/comment literal, invalid escape sequence).
- The `lexeme` field of the error token contains a descriptive message (currently mostly in English, except for number parsing errors).
- Invalid character detection.
- Malformed token reporting (e.g., unterminated strings, invalid escape sequences).
- Note: Detailed Arabic error messages for general lexing errors are not yet implemented. Unicode validation is limited to assuming valid UTF-16LE input.

## Lexer Structure

### BaaLexer

The main lexer structure holds the current state of the lexical analysis process:

```c
typedef struct {
    const wchar_t* source;   // Source code being lexed
    size_t start;           // Start of current token
    size_t current;         // Current position in source
    size_t line;           // Current line number
    size_t column;         // Current column number
} BaaLexer;
```

### BaaToken

Represents a single token in the source code:

```c
typedef struct {
    BaaTokenType type;       // Type of the token
    const wchar_t* lexeme;   // The actual text of the token
    size_t length;           // Length of the lexeme
    size_t line;            // Line number in source
    size_t column;          // Column number in source
} BaaToken;
```

### BaaTokenType

Enumeration of all possible token types in the Baa language:

```c
typedef enum {
    // Special tokens
    BAA_TOKEN_EOF,        // End of file
    BAA_TOKEN_ERROR,      // Error token
    BAA_TOKEN_UNKNOWN,    // Unknown token
    BAA_TOKEN_COMMENT,    // Comment (Defined, but not currently produced by scanner)

    // Literals
    BAA_TOKEN_IDENTIFIER, // Variable/function name
    BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT,    // Integer literal
    BAA_TOKEN_FLOAT_LIT,  // Float literal (Identified by lexer based on syntax like '.' or 'e')
    BAA_TOKEN_CHAR_LIT,   // Character literal
    BAA_TOKEN_STRING_LIT, // String literal
    BAA_TOKEN_BOOL_LIT,   // Boolean literal (صحيح/خطأ - true/false)

    // Keywords
    BAA_TOKEN_FUNC,       // دالة
    BAA_TOKEN_VAR,        // متغير
    BAA_TOKEN_CONST,      // ثابت
    BAA_TOKEN_IF,         // إذا
    BAA_TOKEN_ELSE,       // وإلا
    BAA_TOKEN_WHILE,      // طالما
    BAA_TOKEN_FOR,        // لكل
    BAA_TOKEN_DO,         // افعل
    BAA_TOKEN_CASE,       // حالة
    BAA_TOKEN_SWITCH,     // اختر
    BAA_TOKEN_RETURN,     // إرجع
    BAA_TOKEN_BREAK,      // توقف
    BAA_TOKEN_CONTINUE,   // أكمل

    // Types
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_INT,   // عدد_صحيح
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_FLOAT, // عدد_حقيقي
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_CHAR,  // حرف
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_VOID,  // فراغ
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_BOOL,  // منطقي

    // Operators (Arithmetic, Comparison, Logical)
    BAA_TOKEN_PLUS,       // +
    BAA_TOKEN_MINUS,      // -
    BAA_TOKEN_STAR,       // *
    BAA_TOKEN_SLASH,      // /
    BAA_TOKEN_PERCENT,    // %
    BAA_TOKEN_EQUAL_EQUAL,// ==
    BAA_TOKEN_BANG,       // !
    BAA_TOKEN_BANG_EQUAL, // !=
    BAA_TOKEN_LESS,       // <
    BAA_TOKEN_LESS_EQUAL, // <=
    BAA_TOKEN_GREATER,    // >
    BAA_TOKEN_GREATER_EQUAL, // >=
    BAA_TOKEN_AND,        // &&
    BAA_TOKEN_OR,         // ||
    BAA_TOKEN_EQUAL,      // = (Assignment)

    // Compound assignment operators
    BAA_TOKEN_PLUS_EQUAL,  // +=
    BAA_TOKEN_MINUS_EQUAL, // -=
    BAA_TOKEN_STAR_EQUAL,  // *=
    BAA_TOKEN_SLASH_EQUAL, // /=
    BAA_TOKEN_PERCENT_EQUAL, // %=

    // Increment/decrement operators
    BAA_TOKEN_INCREMENT,   // ++
    BAA_TOKEN_DECREMENT,   // --

    // Delimiters
    BAA_TOKEN_LPAREN,     // (
    BAA_TOKEN_RPAREN,     // )
    BAA_TOKEN_LBRACE,     // {
    BAA_TOKEN_RBRACE,     // }
    BAA_TOKEN_LBRACKET,   // [
    BAA_TOKEN_RBRACKET,   // ]
    BAA_TOKEN_COMMA,      // ,
    BAA_TOKEN_DOT,        // .
    BAA_TOKEN_SEMICOLON,  // ;
    BAA_TOKEN_COLON,      // :
} BaaTokenType;
```

## Numeric Literals

The lexer's `scan_number` function is responsible for identifying numeric literals and tokenizing them as either `BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT` or `BAA_TOKEN_FLOAT_LIT`. It extracts the raw text of the number. The actual conversion of this text to a C numeric type (e.g., `long long`, `double`) is typically handled later by the parser or a dedicated utility like `baa_parse_number`.

The lexer supports the following formats for numeric literals:

### 1. Integer Literals (`BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT`)
    - **Decimal Integers**: Sequences of Western digits (`0`-`9`) and/or Arabic-Indic digits (`٠`-`٩` / U+0660-U+0669).
        - Examples: `123`, `٤٢`, `0`, `٠`, `12٠3٤`
    - **Binary Integers**: Must start with `0b` or `0B`, followed by binary digits (`0` or `1`).
        - Examples: `0b1010`, `0B11001`
    - **Hexadecimal Integers**: Must start with `0x` or `0X`, followed by hexadecimal digits (`0`-`9`, `a`-`f`, `A`-`F`).
        - Examples: `0x1a3f`, `0XFF`, `0xDeadBeef`
    - **Underscores for Readability**: Single underscores (`_`) can be used as separators within the digits of any integer literal type. They cannot be consecutive, at the very beginning of the digit sequence (immediately after a prefix like `0x_`), or at the end of the number.
        - Examples: `1_000_000`, `0xFF_EC`, `0b1010_0101`, `١_٢٣٤_٥٦٧`

### 2. Floating-Point Literals (`BAA_TOKEN_FLOAT_LIT`)
    Float literals are identified if they contain a decimal point (`.` or `٫`) or an exponent part (`e` or `E`).
    - **Decimal Representation**:
        - Consist of an integer part, a decimal point, and a fractional part.
        - The decimal point can be a period `.` (U+002E) or an Arabic Decimal Separator `٫` (U+066B).
        - Digits in the integer and fractional parts can be Western (`0`-`9`) or Arabic-Indic (`٠`-`٩`).
        - Examples: `3.14`, `0.5`, `٣٫١٤`, `123.456`, `٠.٥`
        - Note: Literals starting with a dot (e.g., `.5`) or ending with a dot without a fractional part (e.g., `123.`) are tokenized differently by the lexer (e.g., `BAA_TOKEN_DOT` followed by `BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT`, or `BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT` followed by `BAA_TOKEN_DOT`). The parser would determine their validity as float literals.
    - **Scientific Notation**:
        - Can be appended to a decimal number (integer or fractional part).
        - Introduced by `e` or `E`, followed by an optional sign (`+` or `-`), and then one or more decimal digits (Western or Arabic-Indic).
        - Examples: `1.23e4`, `5.67E-3`, `42e+2`, `1e10`, `٣٫١٤e-2`, `12E+٠٥`
    - **Underscores for Readability**: Single underscores (`_`) can be used as separators within the integer part, fractional part, and exponent part of float literals, with the same restrictions as for integer literals.
        - Examples: `1_234.567_890`, `3.141_592e+1_0`

*(The following sections describe a utility `baa_parse_number` which is separate from the lexer's `scan_number` but complements it by performing the actual string-to-value conversion. The lexer's `scan_number` primarily focuses on identifying the token type and boundaries.)*

### BaaNumberType (Utility)

```c
typedef enum {
    BAA_NUM_INTEGER,     // عدد_صحيح - Integer number
    BAA_NUM_DECIMAL,     // عدد_عشري - Decimal number
    BAA_NUM_SCIENTIFIC   // عدد_علمي - Scientific notation
} BaaNumberType;
```

### BaaNumber

```c
typedef struct {
    BaaNumberType type;
    union {
        long long int_value;
        double decimal_value;
    };
    const wchar_t* raw_text;  // Original text representation
    size_t text_length;
} BaaNumber;
```

### BaaNumberError

```c
typedef enum {
    BAA_NUM_SUCCESS = 0,
    BAA_NUM_OVERFLOW,        // Number too large
    BAA_NUM_INVALID_CHAR,    // Invalid character in number
    BAA_NUM_MULTIPLE_DOTS,   // Multiple decimal points
    BAA_NUM_INVALID_FORMAT,  // Invalid number format
    BAA_NUM_MEMORY_ERROR     // Memory allocation error
} BaaNumberError;
```

### Number Parsing Utility Functions (e.g., `baa_parse_number`)

- `baa_parse_number`: Parse a string as a number, detecting the format automatically.
- `baa_free_number`: Free a number structure.
- `baa_number_error_message`: Get error message for number parsing (provides Arabic messages).
- `baa_is_digit`: Check if a character is a digit (including Arabic-Indic digits).
- `baa_is_hex_digit`: Check if a character is a hexadecimal digit.
- `baa_is_arabic_digit`: Check if a character is an Arabic-Indic digit.

## Keyword, Type, and Boolean Literal Recognition

The lexer recognizes keywords, type names, and boolean literals by checking scanned identifiers against an internal list:

- **Keywords**: `متغير` (VAR), `ثابت` (CONST), `دالة`, `إذا`, etc. are tokenized with their specific types (e.g., `BAA_TOKEN_VAR`).
- **Type Names**: `عدد_صحيح`, `عدد_حقيقي`, `حرف`, `فراغ`, `منطقي` are tokenized with their respective `BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_*` types.
- **Boolean Literals**: `صحيح` (True) and `خطأ` (False) are tokenized as `BAA_TOKEN_BOOL_LIT`.

Example:

```baa
متغير x: منطقي = صحيح؛
إذا (x == صحيح) {
    // ...
} وإلا {
    // ...
}
```

## Operator Support

The lexer supports a wide range of operators, tokenized with corresponding types (e.g., `BAA_TOKEN_PLUS`, `BAA_TOKEN_INCREMENT`):

- **Arithmetic**: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`
- **Comparison**: `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`
- **Logical**: `&&`, `||`, `!`
- **Assignment**: `=`, `+=`, `-=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`
- **Increment/Decrement**: `++`, `--`

## String and Character Handling

- [x] Basic string literal support (double quotes)
- [x] Character literal support (single quotes)
- [x] Basic escape sequences in strings/chars (\n, \t, \\, \", \', \r, \0)
- [x] Unicode escape sequences (\uXXXX)
- [ ] Multiline strings

## Comment Support

- Single line comments (`//` style - Skipped, not tokenized)
- Multi-line comments (`/* ... */` - Skipped, not tokenized)
- Note: Legacy `#` style comments are no longer supported by the lexer. The preprocessor handles lines starting with `#` for directives.
- Documentation comments (e.g., `/** ... */` or other syntax TBD)

## Usage

### Initialization

The primary way to initialize the lexer is using `baa_init_lexer`:

```c
#include "baa/lexer/lexer.h"
#include "baa/utils/utils.h" // For file reading

// ...

const wchar_t* filename = L"your_file.baa";
// Use a utility function (e.g., from utils.h) to read the file content
// Assuming baa_file_content (moved to utils) or similar exists:
wchar_t* source_code = baa_file_content(filename); // Or baa_read_file
if (!source_code) { /* Handle file reading error */ }

BaaLexer lexer; // Allocate on stack or heap as needed
baa_init_lexer(&lexer, source_code, filename); // Initialize the lexer state

// If using baa_create_lexer (allocates lexer struct on heap):
// BaaLexer* lexer_ptr = baa_create_lexer(source_code);
// if (!lexer_ptr) { /* Handle allocation error */ }
// // Use lexer_ptr->...
// baa_free_lexer(lexer_ptr); // Remember to free later

// Remember to free source_code when done
// free(source_code);

```

### Token Processing

```c
BaaToken* token;
do {
    token = baa_lexer_next_token(lexer);
    if (!token) {
        // Handle potential memory allocation error during token creation
        fprintf(stderr, "Failed to create token.\n");
        break;
    }

    // Process the token based on its type
    wprintf(L"Token: %ls, Lexeme: '%ls', Line: %zu, Col: %zu\n",
            baa_token_type_to_string(token->type), // Function exists
            token->lexeme ? token->lexeme : L"<NULL>", // Handle potential NULL lexeme
            token->line,
            token->column);

    if (token->type == BAA_TOKEN_ERROR) {
        // Handle lexer error (message is in token->lexeme)
        fwprintf(stderr, L"Lexer Error: %ls at Line %zu, Col %zu\n",
                 token->lexeme, token->line, token->column);
        // Depending on desired behavior, you might stop or try to continue
    }

    // Free the current token before getting the next one
    baa_free_token(token);

} while (token->type != BAA_TOKEN_EOF); // Stop when EOF is reached

// Clean up the lexer
baa_free_lexer(lexer);

// Free file content if loaded from file
// free(file_content);
```

*Note: Error reporting relies on the `BAA_TOKEN_ERROR` token type; the `lexeme` field of this token contains the error message.*

## Implementation Details

### Lexer Operations

The lexer provides the following core functionality (declared in `baa/lexer/lexer.h`):

1.  **Initialization**:
    - `baa_init_lexer(BaaLexer* lexer, const wchar_t* source, const wchar_t* filename)`: Initializes a pre-allocated `BaaLexer` struct.
    - `baa_create_lexer(const wchar_t* source)`: Allocates and initializes a `BaaLexer` struct (caller must free with `baa_free_lexer`).
2.  **Token Scanning**:
    - `baa_lexer_next_token(BaaLexer* lexer)`: Gets the next token from the source. Returns a dynamically allocated `BaaToken` (caller must free with `baa_free_token`).
3.  **Token Utilities**:
    - `baa_token_type_to_string(BaaTokenType type)`: Converts a token type enum to its string representation.
    - `baa_token_is_keyword(BaaTokenType type)`: Checks if a token type is a keyword.
    - `baa_token_is_type(BaaTokenType type)`: Checks if a token type is a type name.
    - `baa_token_is_operator(BaaTokenType type)`: Checks if a token type is an operator.
4.  **Memory Management**:
    - `baa_free_lexer(BaaLexer* lexer)`: Frees a lexer allocated by `baa_create_lexer`.
    - `baa_free_token(BaaToken* token)`: Frees a token allocated by `baa_lexer_next_token` (including its lexeme if dynamically allocated).

*(Note: General file handling utilities like `baa_file_size` and `baa_file_content` have been moved to `baa/utils/utils.h`)*

### Internal Lexer Helpers

The lexer uses several internal helper functions:

1.  **Character Classification**: `is_arabic_letter`, `is_arabic_digit`, standard C `isw...` functions.
2.  **Lexer Navigation**: `peek`, `peek_next`, `advance`, `match`, `skip_whitespace`.
3.  **Token Creation**: `make_token`, `make_error_token`.

### State Management

- `source`, `start`, `current`, `line`, `column` fields in `BaaLexer`.

### Memory Management

- `baa_create_lexer`, `baa_free_lexer`: Manage the `BaaLexer` struct.
- `make_token`, `scan_string`, `make_error_token`: Allocate `BaaToken` structs and potentially their `lexeme` buffers.
- `baa_free_token`: Frees `BaaToken` and its dynamically allocated `lexeme`.
- `baa_file_content`: Allocates buffer for file content (caller must free).
- `baa_parse_number`, `baa_free_number`: Manage `BaaNumber` struct and its `raw_text`.

## Future Improvements

- Enhanced support for Arabic dialects
- Performance optimizations for large files
- Advanced error recovery mechanisms
- Extended Unicode range support
- Implement multi-line string literals
- Implement raw string literals

Commit message:

Adds support for multiline and raw string literals
Implements multiline strings with triple quotes and raw string literals prefixed by 'خ', including both single-line and multiline variants. Updates lexer logic, token scanners, and documentation to reflect these additions.
Improves handling of string tokenization and enhances language expressiveness.

Adds support for multiline and raw string literals

Implements multiline strings using triple quotes and raw string literals prefixed with 'خ', including single-line and multiline variants.

Updates lexer logic, token scanners, and documentation to reflect these enhancements, improving language expressiveness and string tokenization.

docs/lexer.md, after:

# Baa Lexer Documentation

## Overview

The Baa lexer processes source code written in the Baa language, which includes strong support for Arabic. **Note: The lexer operates on the source code *after* it has been processed by the Baa Preprocessor, which handles directives like `#تضمين`.** It reads the resulting (potentially combined) source, assumed to be encoded in UTF-16LE, and uses wide characters (`wchar_t`) internally. The lexer tokenizes Arabic identifiers, keywords, and literals, while maintaining precise source location tracking (line and column numbers). It converts the processed text into a stream of tokens that can be consumed by the parser.

## Features

### Arabic Language Support

- Recognizes Arabic letters from multiple Unicode ranges (0x0600-0x06FF, FB50-FDFF, FE70-FEFF) for identifiers.
- Recognizes Arabic-Indic digits (٠-٩) in identifiers and number literals.
- Recognizes Arabic keywords (e.g., `دالة`, `إذا`).
- Supports Arabic characters within string literals.
- Note: Bidirectional text display is dependent on the terminal/editor, not explicitly managed by the lexer logic itself.
- Note: Standard C-style comments (`//`, `/* */`) are supported and skipped. Legacy `#` style comments are no longer supported by the lexer (preprocessor handles `#` for directives).

### Token Types

The lexer identifies the following categories of tokens:

- Keywords (كلمات مفتاحية)
- Identifiers (معرفات)
- Literals (قيم حرفية)
  - Numbers (أرقام - Scanned as `BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT` or `BAA_TOKEN_FLOAT_LIT` based on syntax. Value parsing may occur later.)
  - Strings (نصوص - `BAA_TOKEN_STRING_LIT`)
  - Boolean (قيم منطقية - `BAA_TOKEN_BOOL_LIT`, scanned via `صحيح`/`خطأ` keywords)
  - Characters (حروف - `BAA_TOKEN_CHAR_LIT`, scanned via `'c'` syntax)
- Type Names (أسماء الأنواع - e.g., `عدد_صحيح`, `منطقي` scanned as specific `BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_*`)
- Operators (عوامل - e.g., `+`, `==`, `+=`, `&&`, `++`)
- Delimiters (فواصل - e.g., `(`, `;`, `{`)
- Comments (تعليقات - `//`, `/* */` style comments are skipped, not tokenized. `#` is handled by the preprocessor.)

### Source Location Tracking

- Line and column tracking
- File position management
- Error location reporting

### Error Handling

- Returns a `BAA_TOKEN_ERROR` token when an issue is encountered (e.g., unexpected character, unterminated string/char/comment literal, invalid escape sequence).
- The `lexeme` field of the error token contains a descriptive message (currently mostly in English, except for number parsing errors).
- Invalid character detection.
- Malformed token reporting (e.g., unterminated strings, invalid escape sequences).
- Note: Detailed Arabic error messages for general lexing errors are not yet implemented. Unicode validation is limited to assuming valid UTF-16LE input.

## Lexer Structure

### BaaLexer

The main lexer structure holds the current state of the lexical analysis process:

```c
typedef struct {
    const wchar_t* source;   // Source code being lexed
    size_t start;           // Start of current token
    size_t current;         // Current position in source
    size_t line;           // Current line number
    size_t column;         // Current column number
} BaaLexer;
```

### BaaToken

Represents a single token in the source code:

```c
typedef struct {
    BaaTokenType type;       // Type of the token
    const wchar_t* lexeme;   // The actual text of the token
    size_t length;           // Length of the lexeme
    size_t line;            // Line number in source
    size_t column;          // Column number in source
} BaaToken;
```

### BaaTokenType

Enumeration of all possible token types in the Baa language:

```c
typedef enum {
    // Special tokens
    BAA_TOKEN_EOF,        // End of file
    BAA_TOKEN_ERROR,      // Error token
    BAA_TOKEN_UNKNOWN,    // Unknown token
    BAA_TOKEN_COMMENT,    // Comment (Defined, but not currently produced by scanner)

    // Literals
    BAA_TOKEN_IDENTIFIER, // Variable/function name
    BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT,    // Integer literal
    BAA_TOKEN_FLOAT_LIT,  // Float literal (Identified by lexer based on syntax like '.' or 'e')
    BAA_TOKEN_CHAR_LIT,   // Character literal
    BAA_TOKEN_STRING_LIT, // String literal
    BAA_TOKEN_BOOL_LIT,   // Boolean literal (صحيح/خطأ - true/false)

    // Keywords
    BAA_TOKEN_FUNC,       // دالة
    BAA_TOKEN_VAR,        // متغير
    BAA_TOKEN_CONST,      // ثابت
    BAA_TOKEN_IF,         // إذا
    BAA_TOKEN_ELSE,       // وإلا
    BAA_TOKEN_WHILE,      // طالما
    BAA_TOKEN_FOR,        // لكل
    BAA_TOKEN_DO,         // افعل
    BAA_TOKEN_CASE,       // حالة
    BAA_TOKEN_SWITCH,     // اختر
    BAA_TOKEN_RETURN,     // إرجع
    BAA_TOKEN_BREAK,      // توقف
    BAA_TOKEN_CONTINUE,   // أكمل

    // Types
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_INT,   // عدد_صحيح
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_FLOAT, // عدد_حقيقي
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_CHAR,  // حرف
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_VOID,  // فراغ
    BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_BOOL,  // منطقي

    // Operators (Arithmetic, Comparison, Logical)
    BAA_TOKEN_PLUS,       // +
    BAA_TOKEN_MINUS,      // -
    BAA_TOKEN_STAR,       // *
    BAA_TOKEN_SLASH,      // /
    BAA_TOKEN_PERCENT,    // %
    BAA_TOKEN_EQUAL_EQUAL,// ==
    BAA_TOKEN_BANG,       // !
    BAA_TOKEN_BANG_EQUAL, // !=
    BAA_TOKEN_LESS,       // <
    BAA_TOKEN_LESS_EQUAL, // <=
    BAA_TOKEN_GREATER,    // >
    BAA_TOKEN_GREATER_EQUAL, // >=
    BAA_TOKEN_AND,        // &&
    BAA_TOKEN_OR,         // ||
    BAA_TOKEN_EQUAL,      // = (Assignment)

    // Compound assignment operators
    BAA_TOKEN_PLUS_EQUAL,  // +=
    BAA_TOKEN_MINUS_EQUAL, // -=
    BAA_TOKEN_STAR_EQUAL,  // *=
    BAA_TOKEN_SLASH_EQUAL, // /=
    BAA_TOKEN_PERCENT_EQUAL, // %=

    // Increment/decrement operators
    BAA_TOKEN_INCREMENT,   // ++
    BAA_TOKEN_DECREMENT,   // --

    // Delimiters
    BAA_TOKEN_LPAREN,     // (
    BAA_TOKEN_RPAREN,     // )
    BAA_TOKEN_LBRACE,     // {
    BAA_TOKEN_RBRACE,     // }
    BAA_TOKEN_LBRACKET,   // [
    BAA_TOKEN_RBRACKET,   // ]
    BAA_TOKEN_COMMA,      // ,
    BAA_TOKEN_DOT,        // .
    BAA_TOKEN_SEMICOLON,  // ;
    BAA_TOKEN_COLON,      // :
} BaaTokenType;
```

## Numeric Literals

The lexer's `scan_number` function is responsible for identifying numeric literals and tokenizing them as either `BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT` or `BAA_TOKEN_FLOAT_LIT`. It extracts the raw text of the number. The actual conversion of this text to a C numeric type (e.g., `long long`, `double`) is typically handled later by the parser or a dedicated utility like `baa_parse_number`.

The lexer supports the following formats for numeric literals:

### 1. Integer Literals (`BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT`)
    - **Decimal Integers**: Sequences of Western digits (`0`-`9`) and/or Arabic-Indic digits (`٠`-`٩` / U+0660-U+0669).
        - Examples: `123`, `٤٢`, `0`, `٠`, `12٠3٤`
    - **Binary Integers**: Must start with `0b` or `0B`, followed by binary digits (`0` or `1`).
        - Examples: `0b1010`, `0B11001`
    - **Hexadecimal Integers**: Must start with `0x` or `0X`, followed by hexadecimal digits (`0`-`9`, `a`-`f`, `A`-`F`).
        - Examples: `0x1a3f`, `0XFF`, `0xDeadBeef`
    - **Underscores for Readability**: Single underscores (`_`) can be used as separators within the digits of any integer literal type. They cannot be consecutive, at the very beginning of the digit sequence (immediately after a prefix like `0x_`), or at the end of the number.
        - Examples: `1_000_000`, `0xFF_EC`, `0b1010_0101`, `١_٢٣٤_٥٦٧`

### 2. Floating-Point Literals (`BAA_TOKEN_FLOAT_LIT`)
    Float literals are identified if they contain a decimal point (`.` or `٫`) or an exponent part (`e` or `E`).
    - **Decimal Representation**:
        - Consist of an integer part, a decimal point, and a fractional part.
        - The decimal point can be a period `.` (U+002E) or an Arabic Decimal Separator `٫` (U+066B).
        - Digits in the integer and fractional parts can be Western (`0`-`9`) or Arabic-Indic (`٠`-`٩`).
        - Examples: `3.14`, `0.5`, `٣٫١٤`, `123.456`, `٠.٥`
        - Note: Literals starting with a dot (e.g., `.5`) or ending with a dot without a fractional part (e.g., `123.`) are tokenized differently by the lexer (e.g., `BAA_TOKEN_DOT` followed by `BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT`, or `BAA_TOKEN_INT_LIT` followed by `BAA_TOKEN_DOT`). The parser would determine their validity as float literals.
    - **Scientific Notation**:
        - Can be appended to a decimal number (integer or fractional part).
        - Introduced by `e` or `E`, followed by an optional sign (`+` or `-`), and then one or more decimal digits (Western or Arabic-Indic).
        - Examples: `1.23e4`, `5.67E-3`, `42e+2`, `1e10`, `٣٫١٤e-2`, `12E+٠٥`
    - **Underscores for Readability**: Single underscores (`_`) can be used as separators within the integer part, fractional part, and exponent part of float literals, with the same restrictions as for integer literals.
        - Examples: `1_234.567_890`, `3.141_592e+1_0`

*(The following sections describe a utility `baa_parse_number` which is separate from the lexer's `scan_number` but complements it by performing the actual string-to-value conversion. The lexer's `scan_number` primarily focuses on identifying the token type and boundaries.)*

### BaaNumberType (Utility)

```c
typedef enum {
    BAA_NUM_INTEGER,     // عدد_صحيح - Integer number
    BAA_NUM_DECIMAL,     // عدد_عشري - Decimal number
    BAA_NUM_SCIENTIFIC   // عدد_علمي - Scientific notation
} BaaNumberType;
```

### BaaNumber

```c
typedef struct {
    BaaNumberType type;
    union {
        long long int_value;
        double decimal_value;
    };
    const wchar_t* raw_text;  // Original text representation
    size_t text_length;
} BaaNumber;
```

### BaaNumberError

```c
typedef enum {
    BAA_NUM_SUCCESS = 0,
    BAA_NUM_OVERFLOW,        // Number too large
    BAA_NUM_INVALID_CHAR,    // Invalid character in number
    BAA_NUM_MULTIPLE_DOTS,   // Multiple decimal points
    BAA_NUM_INVALID_FORMAT,  // Invalid number format
    BAA_NUM_MEMORY_ERROR     // Memory allocation error
} BaaNumberError;
```

### Number Parsing Utility Functions (e.g., `baa_parse_number`)

- `baa_parse_number`: Parse a string as a number, detecting the format automatically.
- `baa_free_number`: Free a number structure.
- `baa_number_error_message`: Get error message for number parsing (provides Arabic messages).
- `baa_is_digit`: Check if a character is a digit (including Arabic-Indic digits).
- `baa_is_hex_digit`: Check if a character is a hexadecimal digit.
- `baa_is_arabic_digit`: Check if a character is an Arabic-Indic digit.

## Keyword, Type, and Boolean Literal Recognition

The lexer recognizes keywords, type names, and boolean literals by checking scanned identifiers against an internal list:

- **Keywords**: `متغير` (VAR), `ثابت` (CONST), `دالة`, `إذا`, etc. are tokenized with their specific types (e.g., `BAA_TOKEN_VAR`).
- **Type Names**: `عدد_صحيح`, `عدد_حقيقي`, `حرف`, `فراغ`, `منطقي` are tokenized with their respective `BAA_TOKEN_TYPE_*` types.
- **Boolean Literals**: `صحيح` (True) and `خطأ` (False) are tokenized as `BAA_TOKEN_BOOL_LIT`.

Example:

```baa
متغير x: منطقي = صحيح؛
إذا (x == صحيح) {
    // ...
} وإلا {
    // ...
}
```

## Operator Support

The lexer supports a wide range of operators, tokenized with corresponding types (e.g., `BAA_TOKEN_PLUS`, `BAA_TOKEN_INCREMENT`):

- **Arithmetic**: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`
- **Comparison**: `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`
- **Logical**: `&&`, `||`, `!`
- **Assignment**: `=`, `+=`, `-=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`
- **Increment/Decrement**: `++`, `--`

## String and Character Handling

- [x] Basic string literal support (double quotes)
- [x] Character literal support (single quotes)
- [x] Basic escape sequences in strings/chars (\n, \t, \\, \", \', \r, \0)
- [x] Unicode escape sequences (\uXXXX)
- [x] Multiline strings (`"""..."""`): Newlines are preserved, escape sequences are processed.
- [x] Raw string literals (`خ"..."`, `خ"""..."""`): Newlines are preserved in multiline raw strings; no escape sequences are processed in any raw string.

## Comment Support

- Single line comments (`//` style - Skipped, not tokenized)
- Multi-line comments (`/* ... */` - Skipped, not tokenized)
- Note: Legacy `#` style comments are no longer supported by the lexer. The preprocessor handles lines starting with `#` for directives.
- Documentation comments (e.g., `/** ... */` or other syntax TBD)

## Usage

### Initialization

The primary way to initialize the lexer is using `baa_init_lexer`:

```c
#include "baa/lexer/lexer.h"
#include "baa/utils/utils.h" // For file reading

// ...

const wchar_t* filename = L"your_file.baa";
// Use a utility function (e.g., from utils.h) to read the file content
// Assuming baa_file_content (moved to utils) or similar exists:
wchar_t* source_code = baa_file_content(filename); // Or baa_read_file
if (!source_code) { /* Handle file reading error */ }

BaaLexer lexer; // Allocate on stack or heap as needed
baa_init_lexer(&lexer, source_code, filename); // Initialize the lexer state

// If using baa_create_lexer (allocates lexer struct on heap):
// BaaLexer* lexer_ptr = baa_create_lexer(source_code);
// if (!lexer_ptr) { /* Handle allocation error */ }
// // Use lexer_ptr->...
// baa_free_lexer(lexer_ptr); // Remember to free later

// Remember to free source_code when done
// free(source_code);

```

### Token Processing

```c
BaaToken* token;
do {
    token = baa_lexer_next_token(lexer);
    if (!token) {
        // Handle potential memory allocation error during token creation
        fprintf(stderr, "Failed to create token.\n");
        break;
    }

    // Process the token based on its type
    wprintf(L"Token: %ls, Lexeme: '%ls', Line: %zu, Col: %zu\n",
            baa_token_type_to_string(token->type), // Function exists
            token->lexeme ? token->lexeme : L"<NULL>", // Handle potential NULL lexeme
            token->line,
            token->column);

    if (token->type == BAA_TOKEN_ERROR) {
        // Handle lexer error (message is in token->lexeme)
        fwprintf(stderr, L"Lexer Error: %ls at Line %zu, Col %zu\n",
                 token->lexeme, token->line, token->column);
        // Depending on desired behavior, you might stop or try to continue
    }

    // Free the current token before getting the next one
    baa_free_token(token);

} while (token->type != BAA_TOKEN_EOF); // Stop when EOF is reached

// Clean up the lexer
baa_free_lexer(lexer);

// Free file content if loaded from file
// free(file_content);
```

*Note: Error reporting relies on the `BAA_TOKEN_ERROR` token type; the `lexeme` field of this token contains the error message.*

## Implementation Details

### Lexer Operations

The lexer provides the following core functionality (declared in `baa/lexer/lexer.h`):

1.  **Initialization**:
    - `baa_init_lexer(BaaLexer* lexer, const wchar_t* source, const wchar_t* filename)`: Initializes a pre-allocated `BaaLexer` struct.
    - `baa_create_lexer(const wchar_t* source)`: Allocates and initializes a `BaaLexer` struct (caller must free with `baa_free_lexer`).
2.  **Token Scanning**:
    - `baa_lexer_next_token(BaaLexer* lexer)`: Gets the next token from the source. Returns a dynamically allocated `BaaToken` (caller must free with `baa_free_token`).
3.  **Token Utilities**:
    - `baa_token_type_to_string(BaaTokenType type)`: Converts a token type enum to its string representation.
    - `baa_token_is_keyword(BaaTokenType type)`: Checks if a token type is a keyword.
    - `baa_token_is_type(BaaTokenType type)`: Checks if a token type is a type name.
    - `baa_token_is_operator(BaaTokenType type)`: Checks if a token type is an operator.
4.  **Memory Management**:
    - `baa_free_lexer(BaaLexer* lexer)`: Frees a lexer allocated by `baa_create_lexer`.
    - `baa_free_token(BaaToken* token)`: Frees a token allocated by `baa_lexer_next_token` (including its lexeme if dynamically allocated).

*(Note: General file handling utilities like `baa_file_size` and `baa_file_content` have been moved to `baa/utils/utils.h`)*

### Internal Lexer Helpers

The lexer uses several internal helper functions:

1.  **Character Classification**: `is_arabic_letter`, `is_arabic_digit`, standard C `isw...` functions.
2.  **Lexer Navigation**: `peek`, `peek_next`, `advance`, `match`, `skip_whitespace`.
3.  **Token Creation**: `make_token`, `make_error_token`.

### State Management

- `source`, `start`, `current`, `line`, `column` fields in `BaaLexer`.

### Memory Management

- `baa_create_lexer`, `baa_free_lexer`: Manage the `BaaLexer` struct.
- `make_token`, `scan_string`, `make_error_token`: Allocate `BaaToken` structs and potentially their `lexeme` buffers.
- `baa_free_token`: Frees `BaaToken` and its dynamically allocated `lexeme`.
- `baa_file_content`: Allocates buffer for file content (caller must free).
- `baa_parse_number`, `baa_free_number`: Manage `BaaNumber` struct and its `raw_text`.

## Future Improvements

- Enhanced support for Arabic dialects
- Performance optimizations for large files
- Advanced error recovery mechanisms
- Extended Unicode range support
- Implement documentation comments
